Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Few individuals have had the impact on science fiction that Damon Knight has.
He's written quality short stories and novels, of course, since his first published work
over 40 years ago in 1941.
But he's done so much else for the field.
He's recognized as the first and perhaps still the best critic of science fiction.
He founded the Science Fiction Writers of America, and he initiated the Milford Science
Fiction Writers Conference for authors of science fiction.
He's also one of the premier editors in science fiction, having constructed enough anthologies
to fill a library.
We spoke with Knight recently and asked him how he got a start in science fiction.
I thought that might come up, and I was rooting about it really yesterday.
Actually, I was thinking, what if you asked me what do I attribute my gigantic success
that would have to say mostly luck?
I can trace my career back through a series of just astounding coincidences, really unlikely
things, all the way back to Hulu Gernsback.
And I can demonstrate that at each of these points, if something rather unlikely had not
happened, I wouldn't be doing what I'm doing.
For instance, if Hulu Gernsback had not come to this country from Luxembourg when he was
14 and started a magazine called Amazing Stories in 1926, you'll see as I go on that
none of the other things could have happened.
So here I am, a 13-year-old kid in a literary and reading science fiction magazine, really
turned on the item.
And through the back pages of one of these magazines, Super Science Stories, then edited
by Frederick Polk, I found out about fanzines and wrote away for a few, and this boy got
into correspondence with the Futurians.
The Futurians were a group of young science fiction fans who later became some of the
major writers and editors in the field.
At the time, they included Frederick Polk, Donal A. Walheim, Cyril Cornbluth, and Robert
W. Lowndes.
I was trying to write some stories, and I sent a couple to Lowndes who was then acting
as a thorough half-assed literary agent.
And all these things added up together until Donal A. Walheim got an offer from a publisher
who edited a new science fiction magazine.
He had no budget for whatever, for stories.
And he knew about me from Lowndes.
Lowndes wrote to me saying, will you donate the story to the first issue of Super Science
Stories?
And of course I said yes, I would have paid for the privilege.
And as a consequence of that, the Futurians invited me to come and be a Futurian, live
one of their communal dwellings in New York when I was 18.
Terribly unlikely things.
Just a series of them, even as far as I've gone.
And I was there a couple years doing a little illustration from magazines and trying to write,
and not particularly very much.
And then in 1943, again, this Fred Poole got me a job at popular publications where he was working.
I needed an assistant editor, and he knew I would work cheap.
So he got me an interview, and I got the job.
I spent about a year there, and I'm perfectly convinced now, looking back, that it was that
training at popular publications that enabled me to write fiction professionally.
It was a training that you couldn't get in any school, and I doubt if you could get it now.
But it just kind of soaked in, because I was reading this watch pile, the Unpoliced
Good Banscript, and it became perfectly obvious after a while what the difference was between
the stuff we were rejecting and the stuff we were printing.
So when I quit that job, I started writing.
Night began publishing science fiction stories, many of which have become classics today,
but he also continued his editing and considers such work as the ideal training ground for young
science fiction writers.
More with Damon Knight next time.
Thanks for watching.
Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Damon Knight's apprenticeship to science fiction came as a member of the Futurians, a group
of fans in the 1930s who later became some of the principal editors and writers in the field.
Knight has written a book about the Futurians, published in 1977.
He reminisces about the group.
Well, the Futurians were a very informal organization of science fiction fans who were trying to become
professionals, and in some cases had had little bits of success here and there in the published
stories.
And I told you that Walheim was editing a magazine before him, who had become an editor.
And after him, Lowndes also became an editor.
And they were writing and publishing a little bit, not much.
And to save money because they were all very poor, they lived in a county old apartment.
At that time in New York in the late 30s and early 40s, there were lots of apartments from
where they were very cheap.
I forget now.
I think the rental might have been about $30 bucks for a four bedroom railroad flat.
If you had four people living there, it was quite cheap.
And we divided up the household duties.
Round with the cooking and I did the fish washing, which I hated.
We were dirt poor.
We really didn't have any money at all.
We rolled our own cigarettes and we bought the cheapest wine we could find, which was
something like 85 cents a gallon.
Our major entertainment was walking down from the 102nd Street or 103rd, if I was
bound, to Times Square and looking at the bright lights and having a cup of coffee in
the cafeteria and then walking home.
Before Knight became recognized as an author of science fiction, he worked on fanzines,
as an editor, and as a book reviewer.
Out of his experiences as a book reviewer, Knight developed some critical principles that he
applied to science fiction.
And he actually became the first and probably still the best critic of the field.
Knight talks about that period of his development in the 1940s when he began writing criticism.
I was trying to write fiction at that time and not succeeding.
I couldn't finish the story.
I didn't have any idea how you got to the end of the story.
But I was extremely critical and starting like any other, right, 17 or 18 year old fan.
The first stuff I did for fanzines was not critical in the usual sense.
I mean, it wasn't book reviews or what kind of thing.
But it was parody mostly.
The things that I thought were really outstandingly dumb in the magazine, funny enough to parody.
I did a lot of that.
But when I say a lot, I lie because I only published two issues of my fanzine and did very little
for other magazines.
It was much later, about 1945, I think, that I did a long critical essay about that.
Those were one of Larry Shaw's amateur magazines.
That was really the first critical work in the usual sense, correct?
Knight's criticism in book reviews were published in 1967 as a book entitled In Search of Wonder,
a landmark since it was the first book of its kind.
What Knight basically tried to do in his criticism was raise science fiction writing to a higher level,
to establish standards for it that would make it the equal of mainstream literature and quality.
On our next show, we'll continue our conversation with Damon Knight.
Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and the science fiction
and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Damon Knight's influence on science fiction is indisputable, and it's made itself felt in many different ways.
Knight was the originator of the science fiction writers of America, for example, back in 1965.
We asked him how the organization came about.
About ten years earlier, it must have been.
There was an effort to form a guild of science fiction writers, and I went to one or two of their meetings,
and it was pitiful because they used the program in their procedure, and they had 50 people all arguing.
And they finally hammered out a sort of set of bylaws and elected officers, and then nothing happened.
Officers all went home and just died.
And I realized at that time that there was a very easy way to do it.
You didn't have to have the big meetings, and you didn't have to have all that apparatus.
One person could do it, but I didn't think I was conspicuous about it at that time.
I didn't think anybody knew who I was.
Later on, I was becoming more visible, and I realized that I probably could do it.
The precipitating event was by receiving in the same week three requests for anthology reprints for flat C's, which I thought was unfair to the author.
So I wrote a flyer, it's a one-page thing.
Advising authors not to sign agreements for flat C anthology reprints and things.
You'd like more information of this kind, send in your three bucks, and become a charter member of SFWA.
I had about 78, I declared them the charter members, and wrote a set of bylaws and sent that around, and we were more of a business.
The science fiction writers of America has helped authors in various ways, for example by helping them get better contracts from publishers by fighting legal battles and providing encouragement and professional recognition.
Another thing Knight was responsible for was to act as the co-founder of the Milford Science Fiction Writers Conference in 1956.
The Milford Conference was conceived by Knight and Judith Merrill as an aid to science fiction writers.
It provided them with an opportunity to have their work read and criticized by other professional science fiction writers.
Knight talks about how the Milford Conference began.
Well, this was in the mid-50s, and for some reason, Judy Merrill and I got talking about the idea of having a writer's conference in Milford, Pennsylvania, which is a very small town in the Poconos.
It was sort of the way you might talk about building a building and basement.
And nothing was done about this until Judy and I went through the World Con in Detroit at the Kivon, and the courage that we were much more better than we realized.
Well, that energized us, and we thought that, honestly, if we invited people to the Milford base, we'd actually come.
And we sent out invitations. We got Jim Wisch to join the Mast Ed, funded more respectability.
And this was the year in which the World Con was falling here. The World Con was in New York, so it was easier for people to get out there directly afterwards.
And we got 40 people. Just amazing. It was quite intense.
We had evening discussions that went on for several hours, and people raising their hands to do the next to speak. Quite exciting.
A regular feature of the conference was the workshop, in which authors would submit manuscripts and have them criticized by other members of the conference.
Damon Knight and his wife Kate Wellhelm now conduct the Clarion Workshop in science fiction and fantasy.
The Clarion Workshop is based on the same idea as the Milford Workshop, though attending writers are beginners for the most part, and Knight and Wellhelm are the teachers.
Professional writers of science fiction and beginning writers too, who have hopes of becoming established professionals, have a great deal to thank Damon Knight for.
We'll talk with Damon Knight about one of his novels on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thanks for watching.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Damon Knight's best science fiction has a real cutting edge to it, some sort of satire, irony, or social criticism.
A good example is a second novel published in 1959 as The People-Maker, but reissued under Knight's preferred title, A for Anything.
The story focuses on the question of how society would change if a matter duplicator were suddenly given to mankind.
The duplicator, called the gizmo, can copy anything, a tool, a building, a weapon, a vehicle, even a human being.
Optimists may think society would be enormously benefited from such a device, but that's not the way it turns out in Knight's novel.
Quite the reverse.
The social structure becomes futile, with a few rich and powerful families controlling everything through the power of the gizmo.
And slavery is a fact of life too. The majority of the people are poor and exploited by the powerful.
For most of the novel, it seems the protagonist, the son of a rich and powerful gizmo owner, will aid in a slave revolt which will overthrow the oppressive society.
But on the final page of the novel, he shoots the wise old slave who has been leading the revolt and chooses to remain a rich tyrant.
It's got to be one of the most depressing endings a science fiction novel ever had. We asked Knight why he produced it.
Well, what you're talking about, the ending that you expected is the cliche ending.
Romantic and sentimental. I wanted to do a realistic ending.
I thought that a happy ending to that, you know, conventional quote, happy ending to that novel would have been wrong.
And this was one of the things that interested me in writing the novel in the first place.
You know, anything I've done is a second cover of this plastic.
I was trying to do science fiction realistically. I thought that was part of the new way that was called at then, but the way of realism, the cane and the fishing.
And I was awfully acquired, still I am, of the romantic cliches of science fiction.
We asked Knight why such a marvelous device as the gizmo would result in a tyrannical slave-oriented society.
Well, I thought it was logical. I was counter punching in that novel against some other treatments of the same device, the same gadget that had been published before, which I thought were compouts.
For instance, George O. Snedt wrote one in which the matter that the applicator was embedded and, of course, chaos ensued, and he rescued the world by inventing a kind of currency that couldn't be duplicated.
And that was one too many rabbits out of a hat, I thought.
So, again, I just wanted to do it realistically.
It seemed to me that if I had made a good case that the fact that slavery would be the result, I admit that it was an imaginative projection.
I don't necessarily defend the idea that that's what would happen in practice.
And another writer, several years later, wrote a story in response to that one, which really delighted me.
I like this dialogue and the second time, which in which he showed that a good marketer, a good business man could get along personally well and make money, even if there was a matter of duplicators.
Marvelous story.
We compared Knight's novel with Poe and Cornbluse, The Space Merchants, also published in the 1950s and also a sharp criticism of society.
We asked him if criticism of that sort was normal in science fiction of the 50s.
That has been dominant in science fiction up until that time.
There had been social satire in science fiction for a long time before during science fiction.
And the magazine published some of it, but it was pretty remote.
It didn't have the cutting edge that the gravy planet had.
More was Damon Knight next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
A clever, sharp wit characterizes the science fiction of Damon Knight.
His work is for the thinking reader, the type who appreciates irony, satire, unexpected twist and plot and ending.
Much of his fiction is characterized by a critical or negative tone.
His stories, for example, seldom have happy endings.
We asked him if he was a pessimistic person.
I'm not a pessimistic person in my daily life.
I hate to word optimistic, but I'm cheerful most of the time.
And I have a lot of fun.
I don't worry too much about disasters in the future.
I certainly don't enjoy seeing people flip on banana peels.
But I like irony and surprising people in his stories.
I just like very much the story that says everything is going to be rosy and filled with the very impossible way and everybody laughs it up.
I don't know why.
One of the stories in which Knight surprises his readers is entitled to serve man.
It concerns a race of aliens who arrive on the earth and immediately put their superior technology to work to benefit the human race.
One of the human's chances on a book of the aliens.
He works hard to translate it and renders the title as to serve man.
Everyone is pleased that the aliens great generosity and kindness until they find out on the last page of the story that the volume is a cookbook.
Another witty effort is a story called The Country of the Kind.
It takes place in a future world in which the entire human race is kind, humane and benevolent.
Except for one single individual, a throwback, who is miserable because his violence and cruelty are tolerated by the general society around him.
The story almost makes you feel sorry for the cruel and destructive man, since his insane actions have absolutely no effect on the blandness he's surrounded by.
Knight's latest work, a novel entitled The World in Thorin, is one that he spent some 15 years on.
It seems a departure from his previous writing and in fact the Berkeley paperback edition is labeled fantasy, but Knight disagrees with that designation.
In the little introductory section of the chapter, I thought I had laid out more or less what happened.
What's on the book is about to go over.
People made a space about the earth and propelled it out of its alloy system.
It also went underground to accommodate the recent population.
But the planet under the control of a central computer, and then there was a war which destroyed civilization.
Complete control was turned over to computers that were directed to do whatever was necessary for the welfare of the human being.
And since the computers had not been told what welfare meant to human beings, it had to try to figure out what was the best of variety.
And therefore, having sealed up these caverns in order to prevent another war, it promoted the growth of different kinds of cultures, each one in each little cavern.
Hoping to find out eventually what the best one was.
Hope will pass, but that was the world which the model takes place.
I really thought I had indicated that sufficiently, but perhaps not.
The world in Thorin is an episodic narrative. The protagonist, a lame young man named Thorin, journeys through caverns under the earth.
And each cavern contains a separate race and a separate culture, and Thorin has an adventure of sorts with each one of them.
Some of the episodes seem like complete short stories, and we ask night if they were published separately.
That's right, Fred Thorin ran, I think, three of them in Galaxy.
We have to go free for a back end of the files to find them, because it took me fifteen years to finish it.
The world in Thorin doesn't have the bite or the satire that characterizes much of night's work, but it's an enjoyable and exciting novel.
And this is what readers have come to expect of Damon Knight, one of the all-time masters of science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.